INTERNALS.md, before:

Angolmois Internals
===================

This document is intended for serious BMS writers and other software
developers.


History and Significant Changes
-------------------------------

Angolmois 1.0 final (204 lines of code) was finished on July 2007. It ended up
as an unmaintainable mess of highly obfuscated code, and was only useful as
an example of very obfuscated C code. (For example, can you figure out what
`i<18?(q&r)||(m?!(l&4)||r<4:r-((l&12)-8?l&1?1:2:8)):i-19?q:q&r` means?!)

Angolmois 2.0 alpha 1 (1797 lines of code) was finished on January 2012. This
was a general cleanup from Angolmois 1.0, and introduced a sane command line
interface and more stable game engine. There are so many changes that I cannot
enumerate them here.

Angolmois 2.0 alpha 2 is being developed as of February 2013. This is intended
as the only major feature release until 2.0 final. Important changes include:

* Joystick support.
* Multiple movie playback support.
* PMS support.
* Bomb (channels `Dx`/`Ex`) support.
* Alpha channel support for BGA.
* More stable key sound playing.
* More recent RANDOM BMS extensions (e.g. `#SETRANDOM`) are implemented.
* New path resolution algorithm. Nested directories can be used in BMS files.
* Fixed various long note rendering problems.
* _Incompatible to 2.0 alpha 1:_ Updated environment variable format.
* _Incompatible to 2.0 alpha 1:_ C99 compiler is required now.


BMS Support Status
------------------

BMS has lots of extensions (quite comprehensive document can be found
[here][bmscmds]) and Angolmois supports lots of them. As most extensions are
not specified or specified vaguely, this section tries to cover most concerns
useful for BMS writers and other software developers.

[bmscmds]: http://hitkey.nekokan.dyndns.info/cmds.htm

This section is not intended to be complete. In doubt, always consult
the source code. The source code of Angolmois is in public after all.

### Basic Rules

* Lines can end with `\r` (Mac OS classic), `\n` (Unix) or `\r\n` (Windows).
* Too long lines (currently, about 4000 bytes) may be cut.
* Everything is parsed case-insensitively if not specified.
* Every 1296 two-letter alphanumeric key is supported. That is, you can always
  use `00` to `ZZ`. They are case-insensitive as well.
* Both one or more tabs and spaces count as whitespace.
* Preceding whitespace is ignored.
* Invalid key or number results in the command ignored entirely, but if the
  prefix of the line parses to the correct command then the remainder is
  ignored.[^1] As an exception, invalid keys in the data section does not
  affect other valid keys.
* The duplicate command overrides the prior command unless the command itself
  allows for duplicates.
* In the absence of duplicates and possible ambiguities, all commands and data
  are processed independently of their relative positions.

[^1]: Thus `#PLAYLEVEL 12.3` is valid even while `#PLAYLEVEL` requires
      an integer; it is equivalent to `#PLAYLEVEL 12`.

### Metadata

In the following commands, `<string>` is parsed case-sensitively.

* `#TITLE <string>`
* `#GENRE <string>`
* `#ARTIST <string>`
* `#PLAYLEVEL <integer>` (defaults to `#PLAYLEVEL 0`)

They are displayed before the actual game play unless `--no-info` option is
given. Angolmois does not try to detect or assume the character encoding;
bytes outside the ASCII region will displayed broken.

### Game Settings

* `#PLAYER 1` (default)
* `#PLAYER 2`
* `#PLAYER 3`

Corresponds to the single play (SP), couple play and double play (DP) mode
respectively. Angolmois does not support battle play (`#PLAYER 4`) and has
very limited support for couple play (`#PLAYER 2`).

Angolmois always puts the notes on the left hand side and BGA on the right
hand side. `#PLAYER 2` is implemented as split notes on both sides, and
otherwise same as `#PLAYER 3` (they share the same gauge and grading).

* `#RANK <integer>` (defaults to `#RANK 2`)

Angolmois assigns a grading area to every visible, invisible note and long
note start/end, which size is no larger than the threshold for BAD grade.
No two grading areas overlap. Therefore the actual grading area can be a lot
shorter when notes are very dense, but the grading is done strictly by
the time difference basis.

The current system will give BAD, GOOD, GREAT and COOL grade if the note is
approximately[^2] within `±{144, 84, 48, 14.4} / (1.5 - #RANK * 0.25)`
milliseconds respectively. Unpressing the key at the end of LN has the same
grading area as BAD. The following table summarizes the hard values:

	#RANK:  5       4       3       2       1       0       -1      ...

	BAD:    576ms   288ms   192ms   144ms   115ms   96ms    82ms    ...
	GOOD:   336ms   168ms   112ms   84ms    67ms    56ms    48ms    ...
	GREAT:  192ms   96ms    64ms    48ms    38ms    32ms    27ms    ...
	COOL:   58ms    29ms    19ms    14ms    12ms    10ms    8ms     ...

This results in considerably narrower COOL area and wider GREAT area, and also
support for every integer `#RANK` up to 5. `#RANK 6` or higher is same as
`#RANK 5`. Angolmois `#RANK` system is certainly ill-designed however, so it
may change without a notice.

[^2]: Due to the current implementation strategy, the actual grading area may
      vary when the measure is rescaled or BPM is changed.

### Resources

In the following commands, `<path>` refers to the file path relative to the
BMS/BME/BML/PMS file (or `#PATH_WAV` if any). The file path may contain
directory separators `/` or `\` which are automatically normalized. The file
name matching is done case-insensitively even in non-Windows platforms.

If the original path was given a file extension, Angolmois also tries to use
alternative file extensions for given kind of resources. This may result in
multiple candidates for a single path; in this case Angolmois choose one
arbitrarily. If the candidate does not exist, Angolmois will issue an warning.

* `#WAVxx <path>`
* Channel `01`

Angolmois supports every audio file format that SDL\_mixer supports, including
WAV, OGG (Vorbis), MP3 (MPEG-1/2 Audio Layer 3). Angolmois also tries to use
common audio file extensions: `.wav`, `.ogg` and `.mp3`. `#WAV00` is used for
channel `Dx` and `Ex` as a bomb sound.

Due to the limitation of SDL's WAV parser, WAVs with sampling rates other than
11025, 22050 or 44100 Hz may sound incorrectly.

* `#BMPxx <path>`
* Channels `04` (bottom layer), `06` (POOR BGA) and `07` (top layer)

Angolmois supports every image file format that SDL\_image supports, including
BMP (including RLE-compressed ones), PNG, JPEG, GIF and so on. Angolmois also
tries to use common image file extensions: `.bmp`, `.png`, `.jpg`/`.jpeg` and
`.gif`. `#BMP00` is used as an initial POOR BGA if given. If the image has an
alpha channel it will retain its transparency; otherwise the color black
(`#000000`) will be used as a transparent color.

Angolmois also supports an MPEG-1 video file playback if the file name ends
with `.mpg` (case insensitive). There may be multiple video files loaded and
played. It plays while it is "in display", that is, not replaced by other
image or video (but may have been obscured by other layers or hidden due to
POOR BGAs). If one video is shared among multiple layers, the playback status
is shared among them and may restart unexpectedly. A video does not support
a transparent color.

If the image or video is larger than 256 by 256 pixels, only the upper left
region will be used. Conversely, smaller one will be padded to the transparent
color (or black).

* `#BGAxx yy <integer> <integer> <integer> <integer> <integer> <integer>`

The image composition using `#BGAxx` is done after completely loading images,
and executed in the order of appearance. The target slot (`xx`) should be
empty, i.e. not used by `#BMPxx` or other `#BGAxx`, and should not be a video.

The top/left coordinates are clipped to 0 if negative; the width and height
calculated from both coordinates are clipped to 256 if larger than 256. Other
clippings do not occur.

* `#STAGEFILE <path>`

The image is displayed before the actual game play, along with other metadata.
Otherwise its behavior is same as `#BMPxx` without a video support. The image
is automatically rescaled to 800 by 600 pixels.

* `#PATH_WAV <path>` (defaults to the directory containing the BMS file)

This command overrides the base directory used for resolving file paths. It
may be located anywhere in the BMS file; the resolution is done after parsing.

### Playback Settings

* `#BPM <number>` (defaults to `#BPM 130`)
* `#BPMxx <number>`
* Channels `03` and `08`

Variable BPM is fully supported, with a caveat that very large or very small
BPM may not work as intended (related to floating point calculations). You can
mix a hexadecimal BPM (channel `03`) and extended BPM format (channel `08`);
extended BPM is preferred if they are in the same position. Angolmois ignores
non-hexadecimal BPM in the channel `03`.

Angolmois has a limited support for negative BPM. A negative BPM is assumed
specially to indicate the end of the song, so that no more grading is
performed and you can only watch the chart scrolling backwards until it hits
the bottom (measure -1). If not all objects have been graded (like many
variations of "Sofa $15 -> $1"), it is not considered "cleared" and the result
message is ignored. The initial BPM cannot be negative, and `#BPM` with
a negative value is ignored.

Angolmois does not support zero BPM both for the initial BPM and variable BPM.
Angolmois ignores them.

* `#STOPxx <integer>`
* `#STP<integer>.<integer> <integer>`
* Channel `09`

Again, stopping scroll for certain amount of time (hereafter "STOP") is
supported with a similar caveat as variable BPM. You can specify a STOP time
as a multiple of 192nd of measure (`#STOPxx` and channel `09`) or milliseconds
(`#STP`). Angolmois will choose one of them arbitrarily if they are in
the same position.[^3] Negative STOP time is ignored just like zero BPM.

[^3]: The current implementation does have a preference for milliseconds, but
      this behavior may change without a notice.

### Data Section

In general, data section does not allow whitespace between keys, but does
strip preceding and trailing whitespace.

* Channel `02` (defaults to 1.0)

Technically speaking, the size of measure affects the interval of horizontal
measure bars and nothing else. Angolmois ignores a measure size less than
0.001, including negative ones.

* Channels `1x` and `2x`

Angolmois supports five basic key models, namely 5KEY, 7KEY, 9KEY, 10KEY and
14KEY. The first two are used for `#PLAYER 1` and 9KEY is used for `pms` key
preset and others are for `#PLAYER 2` and `#PLAYER 3`. The names reflect
the number of keys besides the scratch and foot pedal (which 5KEY and 7KEY
have one, 9KEY has none, and 10KEY and 14KEY have two).

Angolmois automatically distinguishes 5KEY and 10KEY from 7KEY and 14KEY, by
counting the number of objects in channels `18`, `19`, `28` and `29`.
(Therefore objects in `28` may trigger 7KEY even for `#PLAYER 1`.) Similarily,
it automatically distinguishes two variants of PMS channels from each other by
counting the number of objects in channels `16`, `17`, `18` and `19`. This
automatic format detection can be suppressed with `--preset` option.

Angolmois supports channels `17` and `27` as foot pedals (sort of); if those
channels are not empty, the pedal lane is added to the right (for 10KEY and
14KEY, two pedal lanes are added in the middle of keys). BM98's FREE ZONE,
which also uses these channels, is explicitly unsupported.

* Long notes

The player should press the key when the start of the long note is within
the grading area, and should release the key when the end of the long note is
within the grading area. If the first grading is missed (MISS) the second
grading does not happen at all. If the first grading is done (BAD or better),
and the player releases the key before or after the second grading area, then
the second grading results in MISS. Consequently, once MISS is given no
further grading happens for that long note.

In Angolmois, a single long note has two key sounds assigned (one at its start
and one at its end). The first key sound is played during the first grading
(unless it results in MISS); the second key sound is not played, but it is
treated similar to invisible objects (channels `3x` and `4x`).

* Channels `3x` and `4x`

Invisible objects may appear at any positions as long as they does not
coincide with other visible objects or long note endpoints (in which case
the object is reused as a BGM). This means that invisible objects may appear
*inside* the long note, which may be played when the player missed the start
of a long note and jammed the keyboard at anger before the long note is
finished.

Angolmois always plays a key sound closest to the current position in terms of
measure. The grading and playing a key sound is done independently; it is very
possible that the key sound for the closest invisible object is played and
the closest visible object (without a key sound) is graded. This behavior can
be exploited to, for instance, play different sounds according to the grading.

* `#LNOBJ xx`

Forces the key `xx` in channels `1x` and `2x` to be used as an end marker for
long notes. The end marker also forces the last visible object before it to
become a start of a long note. Long notes defined in this manner are resolved
after parsing, so the *last* normal object may be defined after an end marker.
`xx` is ignored if it is the first visible object or the last visible object
before it have been used as an end marker. `xx` is used as a key sound at the
end of long notes defined in this manner.

`#LNOBJ` can be used with channels `5x` and `6x`. In this case, the resolution
for `#LNOBJ` and one for channels `5x` and `6x` is done independently (as if
each other does not exist) and combined later. Angolmois does its best effort
to fix problematic charts (e.g. overlapping long notes); offending objects
that have been removed will be reused as BGMs. This process is also used for
avoiding delicate parsing problems in channels `5x` and `6x` alone.

* `#LNTYPE 1` (default)
* Channels `5x` and `6x`

Forces every matching pair of two non-`00` keys in those channels to be a
start and end of new long note. (Both keys are assigned as a key sound.)

The matching is resolved after parsing like `#LNOBJ`, but if the same measure
for those channels is defined multiple times then Angolmois matches pairs of
keys in the order of appearance in that measure. This may result in
problematic charts, which are later fixed as described above. BMS writers
should avoid writing the same measure multiple times for those channels.

* `#LNTYPE 2`
* Channels `5x` and `6x`

Forces every consecutive row of the same non-`00` keys to be a long note. Only
a start of the long note is assigned a key sound of given key. Angolmois will
split the long note if it consists of consecutive but non-equal keys. This
behavior may change if it turned out to be incompatible.

Again the row is resolved after parsing, but as like `#LNTYPE 1`, defining
the same measure multiple times may result in problematic charts. (Unlike
`#LNTYPE 1`, such construction in `#LNTYPE 2` almost always result in a
problem.) BMS writers should avoid writing the same measure multiple times for
those channels.

* Channels `Dx` and `Ex`

Inserts a "bomb" which is detonated when the player is pressing the key as
the bomb passes through the bottom of the screen. The bomb is displayed as
a dark red object (regardless of the color of lanes and other objects).
The bomb has no grading area, but if the bomb is detonated before the grading
area of long note end is reached, then the bomb immediately ends the long note
grading.

Detonating a bomb results in MISS grade. The amount of gauge decrease is
specified with the hexadecimal key (just as a hexadecimal BPM in the channel
`03`), or `ZZ` for the instant death[^4]. The hexadecimal key has a unit of
0.5%; `01` for 0.5% decrease, `02` for 1% decrease, and `C8` for 100%
decrease. Angolmois ignores more than 100% decrease or non-hexadecimal key
except for `ZZ`.

The bomb itself cannot be placed in the long note or at the same position as
other notes, but the invisible object can overlap with it. It is possible to
abuse this behavior to provide a custom bomb sound (somewhat).

[^4]: Angolmois does not have the instant death except for this kind of bombs.
      It is not same as pressing ESC, as it will always display "YOU FAILED!"
      message.

### Control Flow

These commands may occur at any position in the file.

* `#RANDOM <integer>`

Upon the `#RANDOM` command, Angolmois generates one random number between one
and given integer (inclusive) with an equal probability. If the integer was
zero or negative the random number is still "generated", but put in the
indeterminate state so that the number is not equal to any integer. Similarly
the initial random number is in the indeterminate state.

* `#SETRANDOM <integer>`

Functionally similar to `#RANDOM`, but the random number is fixed to given
integer. The number is put in the indeterminate state if the integer is zero
or negative.

* `#ENDRANDOM`

`#ENDRANDOM`, which closes the innermost `#RANDOM` block, is recommended for
reducing memory consumption but not required. It does nothing if there is no
open `#RANDOM` block.

* `#IF <integer>`
* `#ELSEIF <integer>`
* `#ELSE`
* `#ENDIF` (actually, `#END`)

These commands affects a flag whether the following commands will be processed
or not. The integer in `#IF` and `#ELSEIF` should be positive, otherwise the
following commands are unconditionally ignored.

`#IF` blocks cannot be nested unless other `#RANDOM` or `#SETRANDOM`
blocks wrap them; the nested `#IF` overrides the preceding `#IF`. In the
absence of an open `#IF` block, `#ELSEIF` is same as `#IF` and `#ELSE` always
toggles a processing flag while implicitly opening `#IF` block. `#ENDIF`
closes an open `#IF` block; over the course it also implicitly closes
innermost `#RANDOM` blocks without no open `#IF` block.

Angolmois assumes every line starting with `#END` as the end of `#IF` block,
except for `#ENDRANDOM` and `#ENDSW` (unsupported but disambiguated). This is
intended to handle occasional mistakes like `#END IF`.


Development Policy
------------------

Angolmois has an unusual policy that limits a number of its lines of code in
order to be compact and avoid implementing unimportant features, that is
unrelated to actual game play or can be replaced by other libraries or tools.
The threshold is currently 2,000 lines. (It is rumored that Angolmois 3.0 will
increase the threshold to 3,000 lines. This observation is actually consistent
with Angolmois 1.0...)

Commit message:

--key-spec is documented now.
--HG--
branch : 2.0

INTERNALS.md, after:

Angolmois Internals
===================

This document is intended for serious BMS writers and other software
developers.


History and Significant Changes
-------------------------------

Angolmois 1.0 final (204 lines of code) was finished on July 2007. It ended up
as an unmaintainable mess of highly obfuscated code, and was only useful as
an example of very obfuscated C code. (For example, can you figure out what
`i<18?(q&r)||(m?!(l&4)||r<4:r-((l&12)-8?l&1?1:2:8)):i-19?q:q&r` means?!)

Angolmois 2.0 alpha 1 (1797 lines of code) was finished on January 2012. This
was a general cleanup from Angolmois 1.0, and introduced a sane command line
interface and more stable game engine. There are so many changes that I cannot
enumerate them here.

Angolmois 2.0 alpha 2 is being developed as of February 2013. This is intended
as the only major feature release until 2.0 final. Important changes include:

* Joystick support.
* Multiple movie playback support.
* PMS support.
* Bomb (channels `Dx`/`Ex`) support.
* Alpha channel support for BGA.
* More stable key sound playing.
* More recent RANDOM BMS extensions (e.g. `#SETRANDOM`) are implemented.
* New path resolution algorithm. Nested directories can be used in BMS files.
* Fixed various long note rendering problems.
* _Incompatible to 2.0 alpha 1:_ Updated environment variable format.
* _Incompatible to 2.0 alpha 1:_ C99 compiler is required now.


BMS Support Status
------------------

BMS has lots of extensions (quite comprehensive document can be found
[here][bmscmds]) and Angolmois supports lots of them. As most extensions are
not specified or specified vaguely, this section tries to cover most concerns
useful for BMS writers and other software developers.

[bmscmds]: http://hitkey.nekokan.dyndns.info/cmds.htm

This section is not intended to be complete. In doubt, always consult
the source code. The source code of Angolmois is in public after all.

### Basic Rules

* Lines can end with `\r` (Mac OS classic), `\n` (Unix) or `\r\n` (Windows).
* Too long lines (currently, about 4000 bytes) may be cut.
* Everything is parsed case-insensitively if not specified.
* Every 1296 two-letter alphanumeric key is supported. That is, you can always
  use `00` to `ZZ`. They are case-insensitive as well.
* Both one or more tabs and spaces count as whitespace.
* Preceding whitespace is ignored.
* Invalid key or number results in the command ignored entirely, but if the
  prefix of the line parses to the correct command then the remainder is
  ignored.[^1] As an exception, invalid keys in the data section does not
  affect other valid keys.
* The duplicate command overrides the prior command unless the command itself
  allows for duplicates.
* In the absence of duplicates and possible ambiguities, all commands and data
  are processed independently of their relative positions.

[^1]: Thus `#PLAYLEVEL 12.3` is valid even while `#PLAYLEVEL` requires
      an integer; it is equivalent to `#PLAYLEVEL 12`.

### Metadata

In the following commands, `<string>` is parsed case-sensitively.

* `#TITLE <string>`
* `#GENRE <string>`
* `#ARTIST <string>`
* `#PLAYLEVEL <integer>` (defaults to `#PLAYLEVEL 0`)

They are displayed before the actual game play unless `--no-info` option is
given. Angolmois does not try to detect or assume the character encoding;
bytes outside the ASCII region will displayed broken.

### Game Settings

* `#PLAYER 1` (default)
* `#PLAYER 2`
* `#PLAYER 3`

Corresponds to the single play (SP), couple play and double play (DP) mode
respectively. Angolmois does not support battle play (`#PLAYER 4`) and has
very limited support for couple play (`#PLAYER 2`).

Angolmois always puts the notes on the left hand side and BGA on the right
hand side. `#PLAYER 2` is implemented as split notes on both sides, and
otherwise same as `#PLAYER 3` (they share the same gauge and grading).

* `#RANK <integer>` (defaults to `#RANK 2`)

Angolmois assigns a grading area to every visible, invisible note and long
note start/end, which size is no larger than the threshold for BAD grade.
No two grading areas overlap. Therefore the actual grading area can be a lot
shorter when notes are very dense, but the grading is done strictly by
the time difference basis.

The current system will give BAD, GOOD, GREAT and COOL grade if the note is
approximately[^2] within `±{144, 84, 48, 14.4} / (1.5 - #RANK * 0.25)`
milliseconds respectively. Unpressing the key at the end of LN has the same
grading area as BAD. The following table summarizes the hard values:

	#RANK:  5       4       3       2       1       0       -1      ...

	BAD:    576ms   288ms   192ms   144ms   115ms   96ms    82ms    ...
	GOOD:   336ms   168ms   112ms   84ms    67ms    56ms    48ms    ...
	GREAT:  192ms   96ms    64ms    48ms    38ms    32ms    27ms    ...
	COOL:   58ms    29ms    19ms    14ms    12ms    10ms    8ms     ...

This results in considerably narrower COOL area and wider GREAT area, and also
support for every integer `#RANK` up to 5. `#RANK 6` or higher is same as
`#RANK 5`. Angolmois `#RANK` system is certainly ill-designed however, so it
may change without a notice.

[^2]: Due to the current implementation strategy, the actual grading area may
      vary when the measure is rescaled or BPM is changed.

### Resources

In the following commands, `<path>` refers to the file path relative to the
BMS/BME/BML/PMS file (or `#PATH_WAV` if any). The file path may contain
directory separators `/` or `\` which are automatically normalized. The file
name matching is done case-insensitively even in non-Windows platforms.

If the original path was given a file extension, Angolmois also tries to use
alternative file extensions for given kind of resources. This may result in
multiple candidates for a single path; in this case Angolmois choose one
arbitrarily. If the candidate does not exist, Angolmois will issue an warning.

* `#WAVxx <path>`
* Channel `01`

Angolmois supports every audio file format that SDL\_mixer supports, including
WAV, OGG (Vorbis), MP3 (MPEG-1/2 Audio Layer 3). Angolmois also tries to use
common audio file extensions: `.wav`, `.ogg` and `.mp3`. `#WAV00` is used for
channel `Dx` and `Ex` as a bomb sound.

Due to the limitation of SDL's WAV parser, WAVs with sampling rates other than
11025, 22050 or 44100 Hz may sound incorrectly.

* `#BMPxx <path>`
* Channels `04` (bottom layer), `06` (POOR BGA) and `07` (top layer)

Angolmois supports every image file format that SDL\_image supports, including
BMP (including RLE-compressed ones), PNG, JPEG, GIF and so on. Angolmois also
tries to use common image file extensions: `.bmp`, `.png`, `.jpg`/`.jpeg` and
`.gif`. `#BMP00` is used as an initial POOR BGA if given. If the image has an
alpha channel it will retain its transparency; otherwise the color black
(`#000000`) will be used as a transparent color.

Angolmois also supports an MPEG-1 video file playback if the file name ends
with `.mpg` (case insensitive). There may be multiple video files loaded and
played. It plays while it is "in display", that is, not replaced by other
image or video (but may have been obscured by other layers or hidden due to
POOR BGAs). If one video is shared among multiple layers, the playback status
is shared among them and may restart unexpectedly. A video does not support
a transparent color.

If the image or video is larger than 256 by 256 pixels, only the upper left
region will be used. Conversely, smaller one will be padded to the transparent
color (or black).

* `#BGAxx yy <integer> <integer> <integer> <integer> <integer> <integer>`

The image composition using `#BGAxx` is done after completely loading images,
and executed in the order of appearance. The target slot (`xx`) should be
empty, i.e. not used by `#BMPxx` or other `#BGAxx`, and should not be a video.

The top/left coordinates are clipped to 0 if negative; the width and height
calculated from both coordinates are clipped to 256 if larger than 256. Other
clippings do not occur.

* `#STAGEFILE <path>`

The image is displayed before the actual game play, along with other metadata.
Otherwise its behavior is same as `#BMPxx` without a video support. The image
is automatically rescaled to 800 by 600 pixels.

* `#PATH_WAV <path>` (defaults to the directory containing the BMS file)

This command overrides the base directory used for resolving file paths. It
may be located anywhere in the BMS file; the resolution is done after parsing.

### Playback Settings

* `#BPM <number>` (defaults to `#BPM 130`)
* `#BPMxx <number>`
* Channels `03` and `08`

Variable BPM is fully supported, with a caveat that very large or very small
BPM may not work as intended (related to floating point calculations). You can
mix a hexadecimal BPM (channel `03`) and extended BPM format (channel `08`);
extended BPM is preferred if they are in the same position. Angolmois ignores
non-hexadecimal BPM in the channel `03`.

Angolmois has a limited support for negative BPM. A negative BPM is assumed
specially to indicate the end of the song, so that no more grading is
performed and you can only watch the chart scrolling backwards until it hits
the bottom (measure -1). If not all objects have been graded (like many
variations of "Sofa $15 -> $1"), it is not considered "cleared" and the result
message is ignored. The initial BPM cannot be negative, and `#BPM` with
a negative value is ignored.

Angolmois does not support zero BPM both for the initial BPM and variable BPM.
Angolmois ignores them.

* `#STOPxx <integer>`
* `#STP<integer>.<integer> <integer>`
* Channel `09`

Again, stopping scroll for certain amount of time (hereafter "STOP") is
supported with a similar caveat as variable BPM. You can specify a STOP time
as a multiple of 192nd of measure (`#STOPxx` and channel `09`) or milliseconds
(`#STP`). Angolmois will choose one of them arbitrarily if they are in
the same position.[^3] Negative STOP time is ignored just like zero BPM.

[^3]: The current implementation does have a preference for milliseconds, but
      this behavior may change without a notice.

### Data Section

In general, data section does not allow whitespace between keys, but does
strip preceding and trailing whitespace.

* Channel `02` (defaults to 1.0)

Technically speaking, the size of measure affects the interval of horizontal
measure bars and nothing else. Angolmois ignores a measure size less than
0.001, including negative ones.

* Channels `1x` and `2x`

Angolmois supports five basic key models, namely 5KEY, 7KEY, 9KEY, 10KEY and
14KEY. The first two are used for `#PLAYER 1` and 9KEY is used for `pms` key
preset and others are for `#PLAYER 2` and `#PLAYER 3`. The names reflect
the number of keys besides the scratch and foot pedal (which 5KEY and 7KEY
have one, 9KEY has none, and 10KEY and 14KEY have two).

Angolmois automatically distinguishes 5KEY and 10KEY from 7KEY and 14KEY, by
counting the number of objects in channels `18`, `19`, `28` and `29`.
(Therefore objects in `28` may trigger 7KEY even for `#PLAYER 1`.) Similarily,
it automatically distinguishes two variants of PMS channels from each other by
counting the number of objects in channels `16`, `17`, `18` and `19`. This
automatic format detection can be suppressed with `--preset` or `--key-spec`
option; the latter can entirely override Angolmois' key model too.

Angolmois supports channels `17` and `27` as foot pedals (sort of); if those
channels are not empty, the pedal lane is added to the right (for 10KEY and
14KEY, two pedal lanes are added in the middle of keys). BM98's FREE ZONE,
which also uses these channels, is explicitly unsupported.

* Long notes

The player should press the key when the start of the long note is within
the grading area, and should release the key when the end of the long note is
within the grading area. If the first grading is missed (MISS) the second
grading does not happen at all. If the first grading is done (BAD or better),
and the player releases the key before or after the second grading area, then
the second grading results in MISS. Consequently, once MISS is given no
further grading happens for that long note.

In Angolmois, a single long note has two key sounds assigned (one at its start
and one at its end). The first key sound is played during the first grading
(unless it results in MISS); the second key sound is not played, but it is
treated similar to invisible objects (channels `3x` and `4x`).

* Channels `3x` and `4x`

Invisible objects may appear at any positions as long as they does not
coincide with other visible objects or long note endpoints (in which case
the object is reused as a BGM). This means that invisible objects may appear
*inside* the long note, which may be played when the player missed the start
of a long note and jammed the keyboard at anger before the long note is
finished.

Angolmois always plays a key sound closest to the current position in terms of
measure. The grading and playing a key sound is done independently; it is very
possible that the key sound for the closest invisible object is played and
the closest visible object (without a key sound) is graded. This behavior can
be exploited to, for instance, play different sounds according to the grading.

* `#LNOBJ xx`

Forces the key `xx` in channels `1x` and `2x` to be used as an end marker for
long notes. The end marker also forces the last visible object before it to
become a start of a long note. Long notes defined in this manner are resolved
after parsing, so the *last* normal object may be defined after an end marker.
`xx` is ignored if it is the first visible object or the last visible object
before it have been used as an end marker. `xx` is used as a key sound at the
end of long notes defined in this manner.

`#LNOBJ` can be used with channels `5x` and `6x`. In this case, the resolution
for `#LNOBJ` and one for channels `5x` and `6x` is done independently (as if
each other does not exist) and combined later. Angolmois does its best effort
to fix problematic charts (e.g. overlapping long notes); offending objects
that have been removed will be reused as BGMs. This process is also used for
avoiding delicate parsing problems in channels `5x` and `6x` alone.

* `#LNTYPE 1` (default)
* Channels `5x` and `6x`

Forces every matching pair of two non-`00` keys in those channels to be a
start and end of new long note. (Both keys are assigned as a key sound.)

The matching is resolved after parsing like `#LNOBJ`, but if the same measure
for those channels is defined multiple times then Angolmois matches pairs of
keys in the order of appearance in that measure. This may result in
problematic charts, which are later fixed as described above. BMS writers
should avoid writing the same measure multiple times for those channels.

* `#LNTYPE 2`
* Channels `5x` and `6x`

Forces every consecutive row of the same non-`00` keys to be a long note. Only
a start of the long note is assigned a key sound of given key. Angolmois will
split the long note if it consists of consecutive but non-equal keys. This
behavior may change if it turned out to be incompatible.

Again the row is resolved after parsing, but as like `#LNTYPE 1`, defining
the same measure multiple times may result in problematic charts. (Unlike
`#LNTYPE 1`, such construction in `#LNTYPE 2` almost always result in a
problem.) BMS writers should avoid writing the same measure multiple times for
those channels.

* Channels `Dx` and `Ex`

Inserts a "bomb" which is detonated when the player is pressing the key as
the bomb passes through the bottom of the screen. The bomb is displayed as
a dark red object (regardless of the color of lanes and other objects).
The bomb has no grading area, but if the bomb is detonated before the grading
area of long note end is reached, then the bomb immediately ends the long note
grading.

Detonating a bomb results in MISS grade. The amount of gauge decrease is
specified with the hexadecimal key (just as a hexadecimal BPM in the channel
`03`), or `ZZ` for the instant death[^4]. The hexadecimal key has a unit of
0.5%; `01` for 0.5% decrease, `02` for 1% decrease, and `C8` for 100%
decrease. Angolmois ignores more than 100% decrease or non-hexadecimal key
except for `ZZ`.

The bomb itself cannot be placed in the long note or at the same position as
other notes, but the invisible object can overlap with it. It is possible to
abuse this behavior to provide a custom bomb sound (somewhat).

[^4]: Angolmois does not have the instant death except for this kind of bombs.
      It is not same as pressing ESC, as it will always display "YOU FAILED!"
      message.

### Control Flow

These commands may occur at any position in the file.

* `#RANDOM <integer>`

Upon the `#RANDOM` command, Angolmois generates one random number between one
and given integer (inclusive) with an equal probability. If the integer was
zero or negative the random number is still "generated", but put in the
indeterminate state so that the number is not equal to any integer. Similarly
the initial random number is in the indeterminate state.

* `#SETRANDOM <integer>`

Functionally similar to `#RANDOM`, but the random number is fixed to given
integer. The number is put in the indeterminate state if the integer is zero
or negative.

* `#ENDRANDOM`

`#ENDRANDOM`, which closes the innermost `#RANDOM` block, is recommended for
reducing memory consumption but not required. It does nothing if there is no
open `#RANDOM` block.

* `#IF <integer>`
* `#ELSEIF <integer>`
* `#ELSE`
* `#ENDIF` (actually, `#END`)

These commands affects a flag whether the following commands will be processed
or not. The integer in `#IF` and `#ELSEIF` should be positive, otherwise the
following commands are unconditionally ignored.

`#IF` blocks cannot be nested unless other `#RANDOM` or `#SETRANDOM`
blocks wrap them; the nested `#IF` overrides the preceding `#IF`. In the
absence of an open `#IF` block, `#ELSEIF` is same as `#IF` and `#ELSE` always
toggles a processing flag while implicitly opening `#IF` block. `#ENDIF`
closes an open `#IF` block; over the course it also implicitly closes
innermost `#RANDOM` blocks without no open `#IF` block.

Angolmois assumes every line starting with `#END` as the end of `#IF` block,
except for `#ENDRANDOM` and `#ENDSW` (unsupported but disambiguated). This is
intended to handle occasional mistakes like `#END IF`.


Development Policy
------------------

Angolmois has an unusual policy that limits a number of its lines of code in
order to be compact and avoid implementing unimportant features, that is
unrelated to actual game play or can be replaced by other libraries or tools.
The threshold is currently 2,000 lines. (It is rumored that Angolmois 3.0 will
increase the threshold to 3,000 lines. This observation is actually consistent
with Angolmois 1.0...)
